## Lab 5 Notes

### Terms

- **Strong Entity**

A strong entity is an entity that can be defined by its own attribute.

- **Weak Entity**

A weak entity is an entity that cannot be identified by its own attribute and is required to borrow an attribute from another table to be able to identify itself.

- **Primary Key**

A primary key is the attribute in an entity that is used to uniquely identify each row in an entity/table. An entity can have multiple attributes that can be considered as a primary key, but is combined to form a single primary key.

- **Foreign Key**

A foreign key is the attribute in an entity that associates itself to a primary key in another entity.

- **Composite Key**

A composite key is usually a primary key in a table. It is called a composite key as the key is made up of 2 attributes in an entity table that is used to form the single primary key.

- **Count**

Count is a SQL Aggregate Function that is used to do a count of all the rows in the table or a specific column.

- **Sum, Avg**

Are SQL functions that are used to add or find the average of the values in a particular column. Using these functions requires the column names to be defined in the clause.

- **Min, Max**

Are SQL functions that are used to find the minimum and maximum values that are in a particular column. Using these functions requires the column names to be defined in the clause.

- **Group By**

Is an SQL function that allows you to group the result set by a particular column. You can group the result set based on some SQL function calculation against some column in the query table.

- **Having**

Is an SQL function that allows you to filter the result set based on a column that was generated by the SQL function.

### Tutorial Questions

- **Describe the purpose of the MIN aggregate function?**

